1. Introduction
In the world of industry, the supply of water and any other fluid is a key part. Fluid pipe 
systems are used in many industries and facilities that transfer fluids from a source to the 
required destination. Pipe systems are made from many components such as pipe and 
fittings included valves, elbows, flanges, etc. Elbows play a crucial role in pressure piping 
systems used to change the fluid flow direction.
For building and then using elbows or any other fittings in piping systems, it is so helpful to 
get knowledge about their performance before their use in the real world. Computational Fluid 
dynamics (CFD) is one of the options that we can use to simulate the considered tool and it’s 
performance in different situations. In this report we are going to introduce a way to simulate 
an elbow using Openfoam (a CFD tool) with a specified fluid inside it, to see it’s efficiency 
and effective parameters change such as velocity and pressure in that.

2. Geometry Modeling
First step to start a CFD analysis is to make a geometry of the considered object. For this 
work, there are many applications such as FreeCad, OpenCad, Salome, etc. Here we have 
used FreeCad as the Geometry builder. For our elbow, we considered 100mm diameter, 
90 deviation and 500mm length for every side of the deviation. To simplify our analysis
we have almost ignored the thickness of the elbow pipe.

3. Mesh Generation 
After building our geometry, for doing CFD analysis, we have to divide our geometry to 
tiny parts. Such tiny parts called mesh can be generated by different kinds of tools like 
AnsysFluent or Salome. Here we have chosen Salome as the mesh generator. For simplicity 
we have divided our geometry to 3 parts inlet, outlet and wall. To mention some important 
parts of our mesh generating, number of layers and stretch factor have been set 7 and 1.3 
respectively. The mesh type has set to any so that Salome can generate the mesh type based 
on our geometry and mesh size inputs, automatically. After computing, the result shows 
that 39796 nodes and 108881 elements included triangles, quadrangles, tetrahedrons and 
prisms on different aspects of our geometry has been generated. The final export file 
formatted as .unv get saved in the main destination of our Openfoam case folder and turns 
into local Openfoam mesh format by ideasUnvToFoam instruction in the terminal. 
Polymesh folder and it’s subfiles created in constant folder can shows the successfulness 
of our operation.
 
4. Model Settings
Every Openfoam case has 3 main folders: 0, constant and system. In “0” and “constant” 
folders we have our initial and boundary conditions for parameters like pressure, velocity 
and turbulence properties and our constants in analysis such as physical properties. Here 
we have initialized inlet velocity and the inlet pressure as fixed values. The outlet 
conditions are more based on the inlet conditions and the other properties like turbulence 
dissipation are set with the help of Wolf dynamics turbulence properties values calculator1
The chosen fluid which flows inside the elbow is water in 25C. Finally, for the simulation 
type, RAS (Reynolds Averaged Simulation) model with kOmegaSST option has been 
selected which can be used for both incompressible and compressible flows. 

5. Flow Simulation
“System” folder which includes the information about the solver and it’s customizations is 
a part of case that closely related to the start of the simulation. Here, simpleFoam is the 
application which is selected as the solver of our case. For properties solvers in fvSolution, 
GAMG solver for p and smoothSolver with GasussSiedel smoother for other properties are 
chosen. The simulation is assumed to be steady state and the numerical method for schemes 
is Gauss linear. Eventually, for more accuracy, decomposePar dictionary used to compute 
and run the simulation in parallel. 
To decompose the computations, decomposePar instruction and then to run the 
computations, mpirun -np < numberOfSubdomains > <solver> instruction in main folder 
destination terminal are used to achieve the final conclusions.
6. Post-Processing
In the end, for monitoring the results paraFoam instruction is used. At this moment, 
Paraview software is opened, where we can watch the final results. In this simulation, 
we have used fluids other than water like R134a, Glycerin and Engine oil (unused) to enable us 
to compare the analysis from different fluids.

7. Conclusions
After our simulation for the flow inside of elbow, derived data from analysis shows that 
the losses in our simulated elbow is 3,920 Pa in pressure and 0.4m in head (based on the 
water as fluid). Finally, with the assist of Halland equation, the friction factor (f) is 0.0129
and the loss coefficient (k) is equal to 0.13.

References
(1)theprocesspiping. A Short Article on Elbow as Pipe Fitting. The Process Piping. 
https://www.theprocesspiping.com/a-short-article-on-elbow-as-pipefitting/#:~:text=Steel%20pipe%20elbow%20(sometimes%20also.
(2)User Guide. www.openfoam.com. https://www.openfoam.com/documentation/user-guide.
(3)ÇengelY. A.; Cimbala, J. M. Fluid Mechanics : Fundamentals and Applications; Mcgraw 
Hill: New York, 2014.